.TH ARCH 1 "2025" "arch 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
arch \- an intuitive wrapper for pacman
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B arch
.I command
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B arch
is a command-line wrapper around
.BR pacman (8)
that replaces cryptic flags with plain English subcommands.
It adds no hidden state or database \(em every operation is a direct call to
.B pacman
under the hood.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Package management
.TP
.BI "add " "pkg" " [" "pkg2" " \&...]"
Install one or more packages from the sync repositories.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-S" .
.TP
.BI "del " "pkg" " [" "pkg2" " \&...]"
Remove packages along with their unneeded dependencies and configuration files.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Rns" .
Aliases:
.BR rm ,
.BR remove .
.TP
.BI "search " term
Search the sync databases for packages matching
.IR term .
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Ss" .
Aliases:
.BR find ,
.BR s .
.TP
.BI "info " pkg
Display detailed information about a package.
Checks the sync database first, then the local database.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Si" " / " "pacman \-Qi" .
.TP
.BI "files " pkg
List all files installed by
.IR pkg .
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Ql" .
.TP
.BI "own " file
Find the package that owns
.IR file .
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Qo" .
.TP
.BI "deps " pkg
Display the dependency tree of
.IR pkg .
Uses
.BR pactree (8)
if available; falls back to
.BR "pacman \-Si" .
.SS System maintenance
.TP
.B update
Synchronise the package databases.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Sy" .
.TP
.B upgrade
Synchronise databases and upgrade all packages.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Syu" .
Alias:
.BR up .
.TP
.BR "clean " [ \-\-all ]
Remove outdated packages from the package cache.
With
.BR \-\-all ,
wipes the entire cache.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Sc" " / " "pacman \-Scc" .
.TP
.B orphans
List packages that were installed as dependencies but are no longer required.
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Qdtq" .
.TP
.B purge
Remove all orphaned packages (as reported by
.BR orphans ).
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Rns $(pacman \-Qdtq)" .
.SS Query
.TP
.BI "list " [ filter ]
List all installed packages.
If
.I filter
is provided, the output is piped through
.BR grep (1).
Equivalent to
.BR "pacman \-Q" .
Alias:
.BR ls .
.TP
.BI "history " [ n ]
Show the last
.I n
operations from
.IR /var/log/pacman.log .
Defaults to 20.
Alias:
.BR log .
.SS AUR
.B arch aur
delegates to the first available AUR helper
.RB ( yay (1)
or
.BR paru (1)).
.TP
.BI "aur add " pkg " [" "pkg2" " \&...]"
Install a package from the AUR.
.TP
.BI "aur search " term
Search the AUR.
.TP
.B aur upgrade
Upgrade all installed AUR packages.
.SS Meta
.TP
.BR "help " [ \-h | \-\-help ]
Display the help message.
.TP
.BR "version " [ \-v | \-\-version ]
Print the version string and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
Install Firefox and Neovim:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch add firefox neovim
.EE
.RE
.PP
Remove VLC and clean up:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch del vlc
.EE
.RE
.PP
Search for Python-related packages:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch search python
.EE
.RE
.PP
Full system upgrade:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch upgrade
.EE
.RE
.PP
Install
.BR yay (1)
from the AUR:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch aur add yay
.EE
.RE
.PP
List orphaned packages and remove them:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
arch orphans
arch purge
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/log/pacman.log
Read by
.BR "arch history" .
.TP
.I /usr/share/bash-completion/completions/arch
Bash completion script.
.TP
.I /usr/share/zsh/site-functions/_arch
Zsh completion script.
.TP
.I /usr/share/fish/vendor_completions.d/arch.fish
Fish completion script.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pacman (8),
.BR pactree (8),
.BR yay (1),
.BR paru (1)
.SH BUGS
Please report bugs at <https://github.com/oporpino/arch/issues>.
.SH AUTHOR
oporpino <https://github.com/oporpino>
.SH LICENSE
MIT License.
